# Towards an alternative model of pricing

I've long been interested in the rather fickle and unpredictable economics of independent game development and with Sutemi Productions, I'm seeking to explore a somewhat unconventional model for pricing and distribution. Before I explain the particular details, my three main goals with this model are to, in rough order of importance:

a) maximise net income based on holistic evaluation of multiple demographics across distribution platforms (sorry, this is just how things work in this world)

b) provide a low-cost, full-featured version of the game to those who are currently, for whatever reason, unable to pay the full price on Steam

c) encourage consumer participation and interest in alternative distribution platforms to Steam

Essentially, the game will release on three different platforms (w/ prices):

* Steam : $20USD
* itch.io : Pay-what-you-can
* GitHub: Full open-source

Each of these releases will be maintained as regularly as possible to ensure consistent content parity across all platforms. My reasoning for each individual platform follows below.

## Steam

I'll be honest: I fucking hate Steam. The backend distribution tools are a nightmare to work with, there's no meaningful content moderation for community features such as forums or reviews, and most egregiously, I strongly believe that Steam as a platform has, probably intentionally to some degree, cultivated and significantly accelerated the race-to-the-bottom mentality of pricing through their sale culture which has devalued, and continues to devalue in both a cultural and financial sense the work of many (if not most) independent developers worldwide, but especially those whom already exist in a state of precarity on the fringes of the culture. On top of all that, the standardised store page UI absolutely fucking blows, and it costs $100 just to register one's product on Steamworks (and to anyone who claims all these things are necessary for "quality control", well, I suggest you take a good hard look at some of the things that get published on a near-hourly basis).

Nevertheless, Steam represents the primary distribution platform for digital games globally and is generally the best place to sell a game with the intent of making money. Although I initially was very reluctant to even entertain Steam as an option, my inability to confidently purchase a pizza one night without fearing that I'd bankrupt myself ultimately led me to reconsider my stance, and eventually arrive at what I believe to be a fair compromise. 

> For all works distributed under Sutemi Productions meeting the above qualifications, the base price on Steam will be set at $20, and *this price will never decrease, either permanently or temporarily through a discount, sale, or bundle*.

I strongly believe that Steam is a luxury rather than a necessity. I get it, it's nice to be able to have all your games in one place, to have that prebuilt community right there available as soon as you make that purchase. Achievements and cloud saves are fantastic. But honestly, all of that is a luxury, not a necessity; what you are paying for when you purchase any game on Steam is not just the product, but the conveniences offered to the consumer by the platform. And oftentimes, these conveniences come at the detriment of the developer, in the form of embarrassingly unintuitive and archaic interfaces, rigid market-driven design conformity, convoluted deployment pipelines, a severe lack of proper content moderation -- in any case, the list of grievances goes on far longer than one should expect for the world's "ultimate destination for playing, discussing, and creating games". If I have to pay for your convenience, it's only fair you should as well.

So why $20? Based on both my personal philosophies and the [observations](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1W6lZir97bUU0KdvIGNIVWG0O-_A3QrdN/view) of [others](https://galyonk.in/the-indie-games-are-too-damn-cheap-11b8652fad16?gi=94d7c832b3f0) who have far more [experience](http://www.gamesindustry.biz/articles/2017-08-16-devolver-co-founder-relaunches-gambitious-as-good-shepherd) observing and studying the market behaviour of indie releases, I've come to the conclusion that $20 should be the base minimum price for basically *any* full-length (ie, not designed as a singular one-off experience) commercial independent game with very few exceptions, regardless of intrinsic quality, length, or production value. I'm not particularly interested in debating the flexibility of this interpretation past this point: the price on Steam is non-negotiable and I remain firmly committed to that. Luckily, if you happen to disagree with me on that, it turns out you have other options!

## itch.io

itch.io is in many ways the antithesis of Steam: a lightweight, zero-cost distribution platform which offers a massive amount of expressive flexibility to developers, and which seems to place a genuine focus on the needs and desires of independent developers of all backgrounds and levels of involvement. Although there are plenyt of alternatives to Steam, itch.io is easily my favourite as it grants me the greatest amount of control over my presence as a developer, allowing me near-total freedom in terms of what can and cannot appear on my store pages in terms of both design layout and moderation. Creating a new page for a project, uploading it, and updating it are incredibly straightforward, intuitive processes that don't require me to struggle with CLIs or app_ids vs content_ids, and when I'm ready to launch there's no lengthy and obscure approval process waiting for me. On top of all that, I've discovered that itch.io's community is largely free of the vicious toxicity and anger that seems endemic to so many other online game communities: both developers and consumers are consistently friendly, empathetic, and understanding, and often demonstrate a genuine interest in the overall development process beyond jsut viewing it as a pipeline for a deliverable.

itch.io also offers an almost unparalleled financial flexibility: not only can I set the price to whatever I want any time I want, most importantly I can give players the option to pay whatever *they* want as well, which is essential to my philosophy of financial accessibility. As someone who's had very little personal spending power for virtually my entire life, I know what it feels like to be interested in something, but unable to afford it; and the subsequent shame that comes with having to reckon with that in a practical and ethical (and let's not forget social...) sense. Long story short, I don't really care why you can't afford my game at full price on Steam: whether it's because you're going through some kind of financial crisis this month, or you live in a country with a steep currency conversion rate, or, hell, maybe you just don't know enough about the game yet to feel confident dropping $20 on it... 

> Whatever your reason is, I will do my best to treat you in good faith by offering you the ability to play the entirety of my game via itch.io *at whatever price you feel comfortable with paying, even if it's nothing*.

Although I hope for both our sakes that your financial situation will improve enough or that you'll appreciate the experience enough to convince you that my work is worth purchasing at full price, whether via Steam or itch.io; at the end of the day, **the only thing I expect in exchange for my good faith as a developer is your good faith as a consumer: that you'll genuinely try your best to engage my work on its own terms before arriving at a conclusion about it, and that in discussions about or appraisals of it you'll speak with sincerity and good will rather than irony or malice.**

**UPDATE:** I recently read a rather illuminating [article](https://www.patreon.com/posts/32063773) by [Sisi](https://www.patreon.com/six6jiang), a Twine developer, who makes a very persuasive argument that, amongst other things, releasing games for free ultimately hurts not just the developer in question, but indirectly all other developers as well, particularly those who suffer from financial (and other kinds of) precarity. I've excerpted the most relevant passages below for convenience:

> As a solo developer, I am constantly feeling the effects of popular free games on the ecosystem. Because free games don’t exist in a bubble. They’re setting the expectation for whether or not other developers are allowed to sell their game at a fair price. Low income, disabled, and neurodiverse developers deserve to sell their games at a fair price. Everyone deserves to sell at a fair price.

> You may not need the money, but a minority developer who faces employment barriers might. They might not be able to make amazing games sustainably if it’s harder to get people to pay for their amazing game. This is an instance where precarious developers are inadvertently shut out of the industry by their more financially stable peers. It’s okay if you didn’t know. What’s important is that you think about the effects of your pricing on more precarious folks.  

These points were convincing enough to give me reason to very carefully interrogate my decision to release the game as pay-what-you-can with no minimum (which for many people is unfortunately indistinguishable from "free", another point Sisi notes and which I'm sure many of us can personally corroborate whether we like to admit it or not), and for some time, I strongly considered raising the minimum price of the itch.io version so that the price -- maybe around $5, I was thinking -- would be low enough to still remain accessible for the vast majority of people, without feeling like I was devaluing either my work, or the work of my peers. 

I've now discussed these points extensively with several different people, all of whom collectivelly have provided a wealth of equally persuasive and nuanced arguments both in support of and against this decision. Based on these discussions, I've come to the conclusion to not raise the minimum price after all, as I believe it would first and foremost fundamentally compromise the integrity of my goals in designing this pricing model. That being said, I don't mean this as any kind of counterargument to, or disagreement with Sisi's points, which I very much agree with otherwise and strongly encourage all developers, independent or otherwise, to consider at length. I will pay particularly close attention to this issue as the project progresses and make adjustments accordingly when/if appropriate.

# GitHub

(This option is less directly applicable to most players and will mostly appeal to either fellow developers, or technical enthusiasts who are particularly interested in how certain things work within the game.)

I got my start in game development working off of an illegitimately decompiled (for better or worse, I was blissfully unaware of either the legal or ethical implications of my actions at the time) copy of a popular commercial game and much of what I currently know has been directly and irrevocably influenced by those experiences as a modder. It's with that in mind that I've decided to open-source as many projects released under Sutemi Productions as possible as open-source projects (I've yet to determine a specific license, I've been investigating the various options for some time now and will update this document once I arrive at a conclusion with which I'm fully comfortable).

In order to accomplish this, all development is being documented using the [MDMA](https://www.gamesasresearch.com/mdma) framework by Pippin Barr, Rilla Khaled and Jonathan Lessard, which offers a philosophy of design promoting transparency, growth over time, and continuous self-reflection. Documentation is split between each project's respective commit history (which will be made fully available shortly after release), and an ongoing [log](https://spncryn.tumblr.com/), which I maintain daily.

> In fully open-sourcing my projects, I hope to provide first and foremost an exhaustive, full-length documentation of what it's like to develop a game over an extended time period; and second, a foundation from which other developers can build off or take where they see fit, whether in terms of specific technical issues/effects, or just in terms of inspiration. 

In terms of the former, for whatever reason, there still remains to this day a good amount of mystique surrounding certain development teams or developers which far more often than not work towards the detriment of many other developers, for reasons both predictable and otherwise. A whole lot of words get thrown around all the time, some good, some bad, all equally harmful and without meaning: "passion", "laziness", "greed", "ambition"... you know kinds of shit I'm talking about. Similarly I've observed a lot of resentment between developers and consumers online (some developers are definitely complicit in fueling the antagonism as well, which is particularly shameful), which seems to result from a consistent tendency to dramatically underestimate the degree and nature of labour involved in various implementations or processes, both technical and design-related. My goal is to help demystify the development process into very concrete, day-by-day and even moment-to-moment blocks of time, focusing not just on the technical dimensions of development but also the emotional and occasionally physical aspects as well, which are rarely presented as is, with proper frankness and directness.

In terms of the latter, I wish to extend as an act of good faith my trust to other developers who hopefully may be able to derive something meaningful or inspirational out of some aspect of my work, however obscure. I know I've certainly encountered in the past slices of someone's code or some implementation that've particularly impressed me to the point where I've found myself arriving at major revelations about my own work; I only hope that I'm able to do the same for someone else.

Lastly, by open-sourcing my work I effectively inoculate myself against having to deal with requests that I either have no interest in implementing or which would take too much of my time and effort in a direction I don't consider a priority. Examples include translations, minor tweaks to mechanics, or technical adjustments for esoteric hardware (ie, if you're one of those people who can afford a 4k144hz curved 21.6" ultrawide monitor and my games for whatever reason aren't scaling properly or something, sorry, but that's your problem, not mine). If I refuse to do something, there is quite literally nothing stopping you from downloading the source code, learning how to do whatever it is you want to do, and compiling your own version of the game, except your willpower, and in a small number of circumstances, the initial financial investment in GameMaker Studio 2. That's not a challenge or a taunt, but a message of encouragement: I started the exact same way, and were it not for the tolerance and generosity of some, I would most likely not be here today, in a number of senses both figurative and possibly literal.

---

*Disclaimer: The information contained within this entry is accurate and relevant up to the date of the last recorded edit: 01 January 2020.*
